Pleural effusion is the accumulation of
fluid in the pleural space.
And for respiratory therapists, the key
question is simple.
Is this fluid compressing the lung enough
to impair ventilation and oxygenation?
This lesson focuses on recognizing that
impact, identifying the cause,
and knowing when to escalate care.
Normally, the pleural space contains a
small amount of fluid
that allows smooth lung movement.
In pleural effusion, excess fluid builds
up,
separating the lung from the chest wall.
This prevents full expansion, leading to
decreased lung volumes,
reduced compliance, and impaired gas
exchange.
There are two main types you need to know
for boards and clinical practice,
transudative and exudative effusions.
Transudative effusions are caused by
pressure imbalances, most commonly from
conditions like heart failure.
Exudative effusions result from
inflammation or injury, such as pneumonia,
malignancy, or pulmonary embolism.
Always think systemic problem versus local
lung problem.
Clinically, patients often present with
dyspnea,
decreased breath sounds, and dullness to
percussion on the affected
side.
As the effusion worsens, you may see
tachypnea,
hypoxemia, and reduced chest expansion.
Large effusions can significantly impair
ventilation, especially in patients with
limited reserve.
Diagnostics help confirm and classify the
effusion.
Chest X-ray may show blunting of the
costophrenic angle,
while ultrasound is highly sensitive for
detecting fluid.
Thoracentesis is key for both diagnosis
and treatment, allowing fluid
analysis to determine the underlying cause
using criteria like protein and LDH levels.
From an RT perspective, your role centers
on assessment and
support.
Monitor oxygenation, work of breathing,
and
breath sounds.
Apply oxygen as needed, but recognize that
oxygen alone does
not fix the mechanical problem.
If the lung is compressed, it needs to be
re-
expanded.
Management depends on severity and cause.
Small, stable effusions may just be
monitored,
while larger or symptomatic effusions
often require drainage.
Red flags include worsening hypoxemia,
respiratory distress,
or signs of infection like fever and
purulent fluid.
One critical decision point.
If a patient is increasingly dyspneic with
decreased breath sounds and poor oxygenation,
you should be thinking about escalation
for thoracentesis, not just
increasing oxygen.
The key takeaway is this.
Pleural effusion is not just fluid.
It's a mechanical problem affecting lung
expansion.
As an RT, your job is to recognize when
that
problem is mild, when it's significant,
and when it requires urgent intervention
to restore effective ventilation.